So when you instantiate an object in Java
the Java virtual machine allocates memory from the heap
large enough to store the data required for the object.
The address of this memory location is assigned
to the declared variable.
This memory stays allocated as long as a variable
maintains a reference to it.
You can't actually de-allocate memory manually
in Java, but you can de-reference an object by
setting it to null or assigning a different reference
to the variable, allowing the object which lost its
reference to be available for garbage collection.
Objects declared locally and instantiated in
method blocks, will automatically be de-referenced,
when the method returns execution back to the
calling thread unless the object is itself,
the return value of the method.
Objects never assigned to a variable, are immediately
available for garbage collection.
All right so let's get started by creating some code.
Right so I'm gonna create a new class here
I'm gonna call this class References
and this is in our new objects project that
I've created for this section of the course.
(Typing sounds)
And I'll paste in the code.
Right so there's our code, so here we're actually
creating two classes, firstly we're creating a
TestClass here as you can see, with
two string fields, a constructor,
accepting two values,
as well as a toString method to print the object out.
Then I've also got the public class references
which has got a main method that creates
some objects of type TestClass and then
reassigns the references to the instantiated objects.
And we'll talk more about that shortly.
Let's actually run it.
Right so going through the code, again there's our
test class, so if you scroll down a little bit
we've got our references here.
So A-ref is a reference to the "a" "z" object
and we're calling on that because of the first
and the second parameters, A to Z.
B-ref, we're creating an instance of TestClass there,
first and last and C-ref is start to end and
D-ref and E-ref are null.
So the first assignment there on line 45 are
assigning A-ref to B-ref so any reference to the
"A" "Z" object no longer exists after this statement.
The A to Z object being what was A-ref before
we overrode it, so moving on down we've got
D-ref equals B-ref so A-ref, B-Ref and D-ref variables
now reference the first last object, we're getting
confirmation that this ref actually uh,
when we ran it anyway.
Moving on down E-ref equals B-ref equals C-ref
so assignments not in declarations occur right to left
so E-ref, B-ref and C-ref variables now all
reference the start end object.
And all references to the start and end object
are now set to null when we run A-ref equals D-ref
equals null and we get confirmation of that
in the output down the bottom of the screen there.
Bottom line here is by the end of the main method
only one object start end still has references to it
the others are then, are now eligible or would've been
if the programme hadn't executed eligible for
garbage collection.
So I mentioned in one of the earliest videos in
this course that one of the benefits of the
Java runtime environment is that it
frees developers from the complexity of
memory management by providing a garbage collector.
The garbage collector scans for de-allocated references,
and reclaims that memory.
Garbage collection is a process that could have
a big impact on your application's performance,
especially if your application processes large
amounts of data.
At some point you may need to examine and tune
garbage collection options.
The exam will not expect you to be an expert on
this subject but may quiz you on the basics.
So you can actually run Java.exe with one of the
following options to log some of the garbage collection
output.
So you can use -Xlog:gc noting that putting an
asterisks after the gc is more verbose and will
print any message that has the gc tag and any other tag.
You can also use -verbose:gc as an alias for the
above command as well.
And to see how that would work, let's actually
make a change, so I'm gonna make a change to the
configuration for references and I'll put some
options in here under VM options
if I put -Xlog:gc*
click on OK and if we run this now
you can see we've got some information there
relating to what's going on here.
The amount of memory being consumed, used, etcetera.
Basically it's more information
about the garbage collection process.
And the other thing to point out here,
let's scroll back up to the top there,
second line of output using G1, so G1 is the
garbage collector and we talked about
garbage collectors earlier in the course.
With that said let's very quickly go over the
garbage collection options on this slide on screen now.
So firstly we've got the serial collector
and you can see VM option to use, I won't read
all these out now but they're on screen and
these slides again are available for you to download
if you wish, check the bonus video the very last
video in this course if you want to do that.
So the serial collector uses a single thread to
perform all garbage collection work.
In general it's best suited to single processor machines.
The parallel collector, it's basically got multiple
threads that are used to speed up garbage collection,
generally intended for applications with medium-sized
to large-sized data sets that are run on multiprocessor
or multi-threaded hardware.
The garbage first collector G1, this is a service style
collector for multiprocessor machines with a
large amount of memory, it meets garbage collection
pause-time goals with high probability, while
achieving high throughput and I'm running the
JDK version 11 you can see that was the default.
Next we've got the Z garbage collector, which is
a scalable low-latency garbage collector
performing all expensive work concurrently without
stopping the execution of application threads
also introduced with JDK 11 and it's really intended
for applications which require low latency,
in other words less than 10ms pauses and or use
a very large heap, in other words multi-terabytes.
Finally, concurrent mark sweep collector CMS,
this is deprecated as of JDK9 and it was for
applications which preferred shorter garbage collection
pauses and could afford to share processor resources
with the garbage collection.
All right so this video covered the
declaration and instantiation of objects in Java
as well as de-referencing them and gave you a
cursory look of garbage collection options.
In the next video I'm gonna present to you with
a short quiz to review some of the items we've discussed
then we'll pick up on a discussion about defining the
structure of a class after the quiz.
Good luck and see you in the next video.